---
title: Research Proposal
date: 2021-11-02T08:10:29-04:00
draft: false
showReadingTime: false
hideSummary: true
hidemeta: true
ShowBreadCrumbs: true
ShowPostNavLinks: false
---

For my senior project, I have chosen to work in the area of app development. More specifically, iOS app development using Swift and SwiftUI. My project idea simply put is an app that will allow users to share music with each other, and while doing so give quick ratings for each song being shared. I would like the app to have a counterpart iMessage app that works cohesively with it as well, to make sending and receiving songs available directly through iMessage. I believe that this idea is important because it will create a new way to share music with friends and family that is better tailored to your own taste. Since this is an app, and would be categorized against other music related apps, I have searched through the app store in search for similar apps to make sure there is a gap per say. By doing so I have found 2 apps that would be candidates to fill this gap. However neither have a focus on quickness and ease of use. The apps are more or less review platforms for songs, and albums for long and extensive reviews. Some of the main features in my app idea are a focus on quickness, where the user only has to press a couple of buttons, and use a slider to rate the song before it's on its way to their friend.  Doing so will also allow users to spend less time using the app, and more time enjoying the music they're listening to. It will also engage more users by keeping their attention for only a brief period of time. Another feature of the app that sets it apart, will be its chart system. While Spotify and Apple music have charts as well as other music providers, they are mainly driven by total streams. With my idea, I plan to incorporate a section of the app that ranks songs based on listeners' actual opinion on the song, and not just how many people listened. These two features combined will create two different ways to use the app. When users are just on Spotify or Apple music and they come across a song they enjoy and want to share, they can quickly in a few seconds rate and share that song or album with a friend. On the contrary if they are the receiver of the shared song, they can give the song their own rating which may differ greatly from the first user’s. The second way that the app can be used will be on the app’s own platform, where users will be able to see their portfolio of rated songs, as well as the top songs overall or per genre. From this, a secondary function of recommendations could be added to the app, if time permits. This feature would take portfolios of other users who rated songs similarly and recommended songs from that users portfolio to the original user. This would work similar to Spotify’s recommended functionality but hopefully be more custom tailored to users preferences.

Moving forward into the scope and feasibility of this project will include all the different aspects of the idea. Starting with the front end of the project, the user interface is already in progress (as part of my prototype) and will be mainly developed with swift and swiftUI. Swift is Apple’s own programming language and is necessary to use for developing the UI and app platform. I have already made a functional prototype, while very barebones at the moment, that reflects the main UI of the app. A secondary component to this will be the iMessage app. This will be a mini app extension that will allow users to use the app in iMessage directly. This will be coded in a similar manner to the main app using Swift. The next part of this project will be working with API’s. Spotify and Apple music both have API’s that will allow my app Idea to communicate with them, and retrieve necessary information about the songs and albums. This may be the hardest part of the project as I have not had any experience with using APIs. However I have looked into both platforms and seen they offer documentation on using their APIs. Spotify appears to turn information into JSON files, while Apple Music may work more easily considering it’s all in the same realm of Apple. Furthermore another necessary component of this project will be creating a safe and secure database to hold users information. For this I am planning on using SQLite as I have a lot of experience with SQLite, and feel quite comfortable using the language and platform. It occurred to me that this would be necessary after one of my tests in the prototype experiment went extremely poorly due to keeping user information inside the app. Because of this test however I can begin building the framework for the database early on in the project, so it shouldn’t be that much of an issue. The database will need to also be very secure, and not accessible or hackable by users or hackers. Because the database will be accessed by the app, and not users directly, this should eliminate the need for access levels and permissions given to users, and no user will have access to it. However I will need to learn more about SQlite and security to make sure that it won’t be susceptible to hackers or malware. Another practice I will implement into the database will be keeping only necessary information, and as little information as possible stored in the database. If the database doesn’t have personal and private information, then even if a breach were to occur, users would still be protected. These are the main areas, which altogether make up the scope of this project. I would say that I believe the project is definitely feasible, however will be challenging as well.

The prototype I developed to demonstrate the feasibility of this project, mainly focuses on the frontend UI of the app. It has a few different screens the user can navigate too, and each are unique in their own way resembling the basics of what the finished product would look like. The prototype has a main screen where the user can see his already liked and rated songs and information about them like what rating they gave the song, how many songs there are from that artist etc. From that screen, the user can then navigate to a screen where they can add new songs and rate them. This screen is more of a placeholder at the moment, due to the fact the prototype doesn’t communicate with any streaming platforms yet. The last screen that was created was a view of the artists more in depth, where the user can see all their songs by that artist, and edit their ratings and such. The prototype uses a view, particularly the “Song” swift file. This essentially acts as a template, for existing and new songs to be stored and displayed in. When a user adds songs a new “Song” view is created and added to the home screen from this template, or as apple calls it a “model”. The main library that was necessary for my prototype was SwiftUI. While the language is Swift, and all the files in the prototype are .swift, most all files import SwiftUI to be able to function properly. To my knowledge Swift and SwiftUI essentially go hand and hand for most applications. However, as mentioned previously a database will be necessary to properly store user data since the prototype did not pass the stress test, for high track capacity when locally stored. My prototype will be the starting point for my project, as while not pretty at the moment, its functionality resembles the end functionality of the project. Being a user interface and all, it will probably be always improving through the course of my project. As it stands now though, it has the potential to support the functionality required by my project. With that being said there are definitely things that are going to change with the prototype. For instance the current data is hard coded into it upon launch. This was implemented to demonstrate its functionality, without use of APIs and gathering information from the streaming platforms. In the future this hard coded data will be removed and replaced with data imported from Spotify and Apple music, at the users will.

The experiment I performed on the prototype was stress testing the user interface and design. There were a few different tests run on it to simulate different possible scenarios a user could experience while on the app. The first of which was testing different amounts of user data, or songs being added. This was done in different intervals of 10, 50,100 and 3000. These numbers were chosen to simulate a user just starting out using the app, and then a user's portfolio after maybe a few years of using the app. The app built and ran with no troubles for the low level tests. The simulation of a user’s portfolio after a few years however did not. In fact when running the test not only did the app not build or run, it froze my whole OS and required me to reboot my mac. However tragic, it was very useful to know that an external database would be required to store user data to future proof the app. The next set of tests I ran were to test user input in different fields. I used emojis and numbers as my main two variables. The results of this test showed that for some text fields an emoji would break the app if hard coded upon build, however the user wouldn't even be able to input that anyway. In other fields, where the user was able to input the emoji this would cause the build to fail. From this the takeaway was that I will need to implement a way to restrict what users are allowed to input, and where they're allowed to input it. This would take away risk from the user, and act as a safety net to prevent further errors with the app.

Given that this app will be dealing with user data, user privacy and security are definitely a concern. I do not plan on accessing any more personal data than necessary, however even the minimum data I will be accessing must be stored securely. Another ethical concern that could arise is tracking user data. I’m not currently sure if this problem will arise, but as previously mentioned I do plan on adding a recommendation feature. This would be based on user preferences and use an algorithm to give users the best recommendations. However it would also be using data based on other users.  I think one way to go about implementing this without tracking too much user activity would be to keep user data anonymous and linked to keys and not specific users as to protect each user's data. The next steps in my project would be to continue work on the user interface, streaming platform APIs and a database. I am almost certain that the database should be stored outside of the actual app, as to allow for one central database to store all user data. This would eliminate unnecessary data being stored on everyone's device, as well as make it safer and easier to manage. Once the database is built and ready, I can rework the app and implement API functionality to gather data from streaming platforms and store that data on the newly built database. Once these steps are completed, focus can be directed towards making a cleaner and better looking UI, as well as some of the other features previously mentioned like recommendations, charts and the iMessage app. The final steps in the project once everything has been completed would be to publish the app to the app store, and begin collecting user data to test the recommendation algorithm and its success. 

---
